In this video, I'm going to present
a rather technical deviation of
an important equation of quantum theory,
the continuity equation for probability,
which both relies on the born
interpretation of quantum theory and
also serves as a sort of safety check for
it because it establishes
the conservation of probability.
The idea here is that even though
we cannot say with certainty
where exactly our quantum
particle is located,
we can certainly be sure that it
is located somewhere in space.
So, if we perform a measurement and
look for the particle everywhere,
we are going to find it with
a probability equal to 1.
And this total probability
never becomes more than 1 and
certainly cannot become larger than 1,
so it is conserved.
And this simple conservation law
gives rise to this continuity
equation that we're going to derive.
Now, the form of this equation is actually
not specific to quantum theory, and
it appears in many different
fields of physics.
So rho here is the density
of a air construct quantity.
In our case, this is the probability
density, which per the Born
rule is equal to the absolute value
of the wave function squared.
And j here is the probability current,
which we actually are going to derive.
So, to see that this equation indeed
describes some sort of a conservation law,
let me consider an arbitrary volume in
space, so let's say this is a volume v.
And let me also denote the surface
encircling this volume as dv.
And let me be interested in
the probability of finding the particle,
my quantum particle, inside this volume.
So this probability, let me call it Pv,
is going to be an integral
of the probability density, rho,
which appears here, over this volume.
Now, to look at the dynamics
of this probability with time,
let me integrate both sides of
this equation over the volume.
Well, the right hand side here is 0,
there is not much to integrate.
But the first term is going
to give me just dP/dt,
and the second term is going to be
an integral of the divergence of j,
and the sum of these two
terms is equal to 0.
Now at this stage, I can use the Gauss's
theorem to handle the second term,
which tells me that the integral
of the full divergence, so
for volume is equal to a flux of
the vector of which I calculated
divergence through the surface
surrounding my volume.
So this is my dv.
So in ds here is
an elementary surface element
with the vector pointing outwards.
So I'm sure some of you have already
seen the Gauss theorem, let's say,
in the theory of electromagnetism.
But if you forgot about it or
you have never seen it, so
let me just mention that this Gauss
theorem is in some sense similar to
the simple identity that we
oftentimes use for usual integral.
So let's see if we have
an integral between a and
b of full derivative function, df/dx.
So we can write the result as f(b)- f(a).
So essentially in this case,
we have a one dimensional segment,
from a to b, over which we integrate.
And if we have a full derivative,
we can only focus on the end points.
So this, the only thing which
answers the final result.
So likewise, if we have a more
complicated integral now,
an integral over three dimensional volume,
but of a full derivative,
which divergence is, so
instead of having two boundary values,
we have a surface integral going
through this surface, through this dv.
So in some sense,
this dv is similar to a and b, so
the volume is similar to
a segment between a and b.
And the full derivative df/dx is
similar to the divergence of j.
So what we actually have established
here is that the derivative,
what we call P dot of the probability
of finding a particle in the volume v,
is equal to minus the flux of
the probability current again.
We're going to derive it a little
later through this orifice
surrounding this volume.
And let's see if we have a current,
let's say, going outwards here luckily so
that there is, let's say, forms a small
angle with this ds, so then this j.ds
is positive, which corresponds to
a negative change in the probability.
So and it makes sense because it
means that the current carries away
the probability, and the probability of
finding the particle inside decreases.
So if we, on the other hand,
have the current going inside,
the probability is going to increase.
So, in order for me to prove the
continuity equation in the formula I just
formulated, let me calculate
directly the probability of finding
my particle in the volume v
over time using the Born rule.
And the Born rule basically implies
that I calculate the derivative of this
integral of the volume of the absolute
value of my wave function squared.
And the absolute value can be written,
of course by definition,
as a product of the wave function and
its complex conjugate,
everything integrated over the volume.
So now if I apply this
derivative to this product,
I can write it as psi star
dot psi + psi star psi dot.
So in order for me to simplify it further,
let me just use the Schrodinger equation
in its centered form, which actually
appears on the logo of our course.
So and
express the psi dot from here as simply
-i over each bar coming
to the ion acting on psi.
So I just divide it by age bar and
multiply both sides with
the imaginary constant i.
So I can also derive the same equation for
psi star dot, and
since coming to ion, it's sort of real
because of the kinetic potential,
and there's going to be a + i/h bar,
each acting on psi.
Now my age here is a combination
of kinetic energy and
the potential energy, so kinetic energy
is a sort of an involved operator,
which is the momentum squared and
potential energy is just a multiplication.
It just multiplies by wave function.
So if I put everything together, what I
will find is the following for Pv dot.
So I'm going to have here,
instead of psi star dot,
I'm going to have this guy,
so i h bar h psi and
here, I'm going to have
a -i h bar psi star h psi.
So if h were a number, so these two
terms would cancel each other out, and
it does happen, as a matter of fact,
for the potential energy term.
So this h can actually be
replaced with a kinetic energy.
But there's no cancellation
necessarily for the kinetic energy,
because again, this is an operator which
acts on different functions here and here.
And this operator is equal to just
p squared/2m or -h squared/2m,
Laplacian, so
we should write as delta lambda squared.
So again, putting everything together,
so what I have is -i h bar/2m,
which I can factor out
outside the integral.
And in the brackets,
I'm going to have the Laplacian,
lambda squared, psi star times
psi- psi star, lambda squared psi.
So the last step here is to integrate
this expression by parts, and if I do so
essentially by moving this delta from
here to here and from here back to here,
so I see that these terms become
identical and cancel each other out.
And the only term which survives
is the full derivative,
Of delta psi star psi- complex conjugated.
So and this whole thing, well,
times this coefficient, is exactly
the current that we have been looking for.
Because, again,
we ended up with a full derivative of
a vector integrated over the volume.
So we can write it as
minus an integral for
sum j over ds over the surface
sort of encircling our volume.
So finally, we can just collect everything
from this expression and write the final
expression for the current, which I
will write in the full length form.
It's going to be 1/2 psi star p/m
acting on psi + complex conjugated.
And so the reason I can write it like
this is because p is an operator,
which is equal to -i h bar nebula,
and this -i h bar nebula appears here.
And so
if we look at these final expressions,
we see that this measure effect,
it makes sort of intuitive physical sense
because in classical physics, a classical
current associated with density rho
is simply the density times
the velocity with which it moves.
Now here in quantum mechanics,
the momentum is an operator, and
so velocity, which is momentum
divided by m, is also an operator.
And this operator sort
of acts on the density,
which is rho, is psi star psi.
And so this is the final result,
which connects the change
in the probability of finding
a particle in the volume v with
the flux of a certain probability
current flowing through this surface.